To normalize our array data, we spiked five of the ten control cRNAs into the Cy3 and Cy5 labeling reactions at equal copy number, ranging from 40 to 100 copies per cell.
These included histone H4, which did not exhibit differential expression in the two tissues (log2 ratio around 0); cytochrome oxidase IV, kynurenine 3-hydroxylase, serine/threonine protein kinase and 14-3-3 protein gamma which exhibited two- to threefold differences (log2 ratio = 1 to 1.6); and desmin which was around 32-fold differentially expressed between the two tissues (log2 ratio approximately 5).
The resolution of the discordant results for inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, H+-ATPase, branched aminotransferase and epoxide hydrolase is presented in Figure 5b.
The selected probes included SCG10 and desmin, which were highly differentially expressed in brain and heart, respectively; 14-3-3-gamma and profilin which were expressed at around twofold higher levels in brain and heart, respectively; and histone H4, 14-3-3-theta and thymosin beta-4, which showed no difference in expression between brain and heart.
While the PCR amplicon probes for 14-3-3 protein theta, desmin and thymosin beta-4 generated higher signals than the corresponding oligonucleotide elements, the converse was observed for 14-3-3 protein gamma, histone H4 and profilin.
Hybridization intensities actually increased with decreasing oligonucleotide concentration for 14-3-3 protein gamma, desmin, SCG10, and to a lesser extent thymosin beta-4 (Figure 7a).
For the oligonucleotides corresponding to differentially expressed genes (for example, SCG10, desmin, 14-3-3-gamma, profilin), the log2 ratios from four independent hybridizations (including flip dye experiments) were averaged and plotted in Figure 7b.
As the absolute levels of these four transcripts in rat heart and brain are not known with certainty, we repeated these experiments with known concentrations of synthetic Arabidopsis cRNA that were differentially spiked into rat heart and brain RNA.
We designed our arrays to contain 75 different probes corresponding to mammalian signal transduction genes with a wide range of expression levels.
In heart versus brain comparisons, oligonucleotide probes, like their cDNA probe counterparts, could reproducibly discern differences in mRNA populations as low as twofold (namely, 14-3-3 protein gamma) and as high as around 90-fold (namely, creatine kinase).
These reagents will allow the microarray user to add specific concentrations of known transcripts into a complex mix of mammalian target RNA in order to assess, for example, hybridization kinetics, intra-slide variability, inter-slide variability, sensitivity and effectiveness of normalization algorithms.
Analysis of the discordant oligonucleotide sequences (that is, inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, H+-ATPase, branched aminotransferase and epoxide hydrolase) did not reveal any obvious secondary structure that might interfere with hybridization.
This possibility is clearly illustrated for the H+-ATPase gene (Figure 9).
Within the H+-ATPase 70-mer sequence is a stretch of 20 contiguous nucleotides perfectly matching a region in the tumor endothelial marker 8 mRNA.
First, the PCR amplicon for H+-ATPase also contains the same 20 contiguous nucleotides (Figure 9).
Regardless of this, this particular probe was still able to distinguish differential expression of the H+-ATPase gene in heart and brain tissue.
We postulate that a large fraction of H+-ATPase-specfic Cy-labeled targets (which on average should be 100-200 nucleotides long) were available for hybridization to complementary sequences found on the longer PCR amplicon probe but absent on the shorter 70-mer probe (for example, sequences downstream of the 70-mer).
The orthologous rat mRNA has not been cloned yet, which is reflected by the more than 2.5 million mouse EST sequences present in dbEST, compared to only 351,827 ESTs for the rat.
On the basis of BLAST searches of human and mouse sequences, contiguous non-target sequences could also be identified in the discordant oligonucleotides for inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, branched amino-transferase and epoxide hydrolase.
In our hands, optimal UV cross-linking occurred at 450 and 70 mJ/cm2 for oligonucleotides printed onto TeleChem SuperAmine(TM) and Corning GAP II(TM) slides, respectively.
Ten Arabidopsis thaliana genes corresponding to chlorophyll a/b-binding protein (Cab), lipid transfer protein 4 (Ltp4), lipid transfer protein 6 (Ltp6), NAC1, ribulose-5-phosphate kinase (PRKase), ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase large subunit (rbcL), rubisco activase (Ra), root cap 1 (RCP1), triosphosphate isomerase (TIM), and papain-type cysteine endopeptidase (XCP2) were chosen for PCR amplification on the basis of their plant-specific expression.
PCR amplicons of approximately 500 base-pairs (bp) were amplified from an Arabidopsis cDNA library constructed from leaf tissue or genomic DNA using sense and antisense gene-specific primers flanked by a HindIII and SacI adaptor sites for subcloning, respectively.
Primer sequences are as follows: 5'-CCACTGTAGATGGGCTATGC-3' and 5'-AGGGATAACAATATCGCCAA-3' for Cab; 5'-TCACCCAAAAGAGAAGAGCA-3' and 5'-CAAAGCCATCAAGACAAACA-3' for Ltp4; 5'-TCTTATTAGCCGTGTGCCTG-3' and 5'-CAACTAGCAAACCAATGCCC-3' for Ltp6; 5'-CAACATGGGAAGCTGTTTTG-3' and 5'-CAAGCACACGTTATTTCCCC-3' for NAC1;5'-CGGAGAAGAAGAGGAGACCA-3' and 5'-GAGGGTCAAGAAGTCCAGTG-3' for PRKase; 5'-GTTCCACCTGAAGAAGCAGG-3' and 5'-CGCATAAATGGTTGGGAGTT-3' for rbcL; 5'-GAGTGGAAACGCAGGAGAAG-3' and 5'-ACTCCAAGGCTCTCAACGAA-3' for Ra; 5'-TGGTGGACTCTCCGTTCTTC-3' and 5'-CGAGTTGTGACCATAAGCCA-3' for RCP1; 5'-TCAAATCCTCGTTGACAGAC-3' and 5'-CTGTTGCCTCCATTGACAGA-3' for TIM; and 5'-CAAATGGCTCTTTCTTCACC-3' and 5'-TGGTTCTTAACTTCCGCCAC-3' for XCP2.
PCR products were digested with the restriction enzymes HindIII and SacI, subcloned into pSP64 poly(A) vector (Promega, Madison, WI) and sequence verified.
For printing Arabidopsis genes, inserts in pSP64poly(A) were amplified by PCR with the SP6 (5'-ATTTAGGTGACACTATAG-3') and M13R primers.
To generate cRNAs containing a 3' poly(A) tail, pSP64poly(A) constructs were linearized with EcoRI and in vitro transcribed from the SP6 promoter using the MEGAscript(TM) High Yield Transcription Kit (Ambion, Austin, TX).
The TIGR Rat Gene Index containing a non-redundant set of expressed mRNA sequences [20] was used as the 'complete genome source' for selecting 70-mer oligonucleotide sequences with Pick70.
Oligonucleotides were chosen to represent 'housekeeping' and signal transduction genes, while other 70-mers were designed to detect tissue-specific transcripts from either brain or heart (for example, those for SCG10, creatine kinase, and desmin).
We selected individual cDNA clones from the TIGR Rat Gene Index whose EST sequences corresponded to the same gene from which the 70-mers were designed.
To generate labeled single-stranded cDNA target, 10 mug total RNA from rat heart or brain (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA) was reverse transcribed for 2-3 h at 42degreesC in the presence of 6 mug random primers (Invitrogen/Life Technologies), 1x first-strand synthesis buffer (Invitrogen/Life Technologies), 10 mM DTT, dNTP mix (25 mM dATP, 25 mM dCTP, 25 mM dGTP, 15 mM dTTP, 10 mM amino allyl-dUTP), and 200 units Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen/Life Technologies).
First-strand cDNA was purified from unincorporated amino allyl-dUTPs on QIAquick PCR purification columns (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) according to manufacturer's instructions, except that QIAquick wash buffer was replaced with 5 mM K+ phosphate buffer (pH 8.5) containing 80% ethanol, and cDNA was eluted with 4 mM K+ phosphate buffer (pH 8.5).